OrthoFinder is a fast, accurate and comprehensive analysis tool for comparative genomics. 
It finds orthologues and orthogroups infers ##rooted gene trees## for all orthogroups and 
infers a ##rooted species tree## for the species being analysed. OrthoFinder also
provides comprehensive statistics for comparative genomic analyses.
OrthoFinder is simple to use and all you need to run 
it is a set of protein sequence files (one per species) in FASTA format.

依赖的模块
blast+
mcl
FastME conda install fastme

运行OrthoFinder
inputfolder: contains your protein sequences, like species1_pro.fasta, species2_pro.fast...
orthofinder -f inputfolder

个性化分析
Performing a complete OrthoFinder analysis is simple:

1，Download the amino acid sequences, in FASTA format, for the species you want to analyse. 
If you have the option, it is best to use a version containing a single representative/longest 
transcript-variant for each gene.

2，Optionally, you may want to rename the files to something simple since the filenames 
will be used as species identifiers in the results. E.g if you were 
using the 'Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.pep.all.fa' file you could rename it to 'Homo_sapiens.fa' or 'Human.fa'.,

3，Place the FASTA files all in a single directory.

4，To perform a complete OrthoFinder analysis requires just one command: 
orthofinder -f fasta_files_directory [-t number_of_threads]
The argument 'number_of_threads' is an optional argument to specify the number 
of parallel threads to use for the BLAST searches

结果分析
1：Orthogroups 直系同源基因组
1.1 Orthogroups.csv is a tab separated text file. Each row contains 
the genes belonging to a single orthogroup. 
The genes from each orthogroup are organized into columns, one per species.
每行多代表一个直系同源组，每一行中的每列代表不同物种的基因

1.2 Orthogroups_UnassignedGenes.csv is a tab separated text file that is 
identical in format to Orthogroups.csv but contains all of the genes
that were not assigned to any orthogroup.
包含不属于直系同源组的剩余基因

1.3 Orthogroups.txt (legacy format) is a second file containing the orthogroups 
described in the Orthogroups.csv file but using the OrthoMCL output format.
以orthomcl的输出格式输出直系同源基因组


Results Files: Orthogroup Statistics
The statistics calculated from the orthogroup analysis provide the basis for any comparative genomics analysis. They are easily plotted and can also be used for quality control.

1 Statistics_Overall.csv is a tab separated text file giving useful statistics from the orthogroup analysis.

2 Statistics_PerSpecies.csv is a tab separated text file giving many of the same statistics as the 'Statistics_Overall.csv' file but on a species-by-species basis.

3 Orthogroups_SpeciesOverlaps.csv is a tab separated text file containing a matrix of the number of orthogroups shared by each species-pair (i.e. the number of orthogroups which contain at least one gene from each of the species-pairs).

Most of the terms in the files 'Statistics_Overall.csv' and 'Statistics_PerSpecies.csv' are self-explanatory, the remainder are defined below.

1.1 Species-specific orthogroup: An orthogroups that consist entirely of genes from one species.
1.2 G50: The number of genes in the orthogroup such that 50% of genes are in orthogroups of that size or larger.
1.3 O50: The smallest number of orthogroups such that 50% of genes are in orthogroups of that size or larger.
1.4 Single-copy orthogroup: An orthogroup with exactly one gene (and no more) from each species. These orthogroups are ideal for inferring a species tree and many other analyses.
1.5 Unassigned gene: A gene that has not been put into an orthogroup with any other genes.

